apps/www/content/docs/vite-plugin/arkenv-in-viteconfig.mdx, before:

---
title: Using ArkEnv in Vite config
---

import { Globe } from "lucide-react";


Vite doesn't automatically load `.env*` files when evaluating your `vite.config.ts` - those variables are only available later in your application code via `import.meta.env`. If you need environment variables in your config (like setting `server.port` or conditionally enabling plugins), you'll need to load them manually using Vite's `loadEnv` helper.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> You must have the core `arkenv` package installed in your project for this to work. See [arkenv](/docs/arkenv) for more information.


Here's how to validate those variables with ArkEnv. The key is defining your schema *once* with ArkEnv's`type()` and reusing it for both server-side config variables and client-exposed `VITE_*` variables:

```ts title="vite.config.ts"
import arkenvVitePlugin from "@arkenv/vite-plugin";
import arkenv, { type } from "arkenv";
import { defineConfig, loadEnv } from "vite";

const Env = type({
	PORT: "number.port",
	VITE_API_URL: "string",
});

export default defineConfig(({ mode }) => {
	const env = arkenv(Env, loadEnv(mode, process.cwd(), ""));

	return {
		plugins: [arkenvVitePlugin(Env)],
		server: {
			port: env.PORT,
		},
	};
});
```

Note how the schema is defined once but used in two different places: 

1. Environment variables needed for the Vite config (`PORT`) are available via `loadEnv()` and validated by ArkEnv.
2. Public `VITE_*` variables that should be available in your client code (like `VITE_API_URL`) are validated by the `@arkenv/vite-plugin`.

<Cards>
	<Card icon={<Globe aria-hidden="true" />} title="Using Environment Variables in Config (Vite docs)" href="https://vite.dev/config/#using-environment-variables-in-config" />
</Cards>

Commit message:

Don't expose non-prefixed env vars  (#386)
- Updated the Vite plugin guide to include detailed examples of reusing
ArkType schemas across environments.
- Improved navigation and links in the documentation to reflect the new
structure under /docs/arkenv.
- Ensured consistency in documentation by removing outdated references
and clarifying usage instructions.

This update aims to provide clearer guidance for users on leveraging
schema reuse effectively.

<!-- This is an auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai
-->
## Summary by CodeRabbit

* **Bug Fixes**
* Prevented leakage of server-only environment variables to client code
by exposing only variables matching Vite's configured prefix (default
VITE_).

* **Documentation**
* Clarified plugin behavior and added design/spec docs describing
prefix-based filtering and expected scenarios.

* **Tests**
* Added unit tests verifying default, custom, and array-based prefix
handling and exclusion of server-only vars.

<sub>✏️ Tip: You can customize this high-level summary in your review
settings.</sub>
<!-- end of auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai -->

apps/www/content/docs/vite-plugin/arkenv-in-viteconfig.mdx, after:

---
title: Using ArkEnv in Vite config
---

import { Globe } from "lucide-react";


Vite doesn't automatically load `.env*` files when evaluating your `vite.config.ts` - those variables are only available later in your application code via `import.meta.env`. If you need environment variables in your config (like setting `server.port` or conditionally enabling plugins), you'll need to load them manually using Vite's `loadEnv` helper.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> You must have the core `arkenv` package installed in your project for this to work. See [arkenv](/docs/arkenv) for more information.


Here's how to validate those variables with ArkEnv. The key is defining your schema *once* with ArkEnv's`type()` and reusing it for both server-side config variables and client-exposed `VITE_*` variables:

```ts title="vite.config.ts"
import arkenvVitePlugin from "@arkenv/vite-plugin";
import arkenv, { type } from "arkenv";
import { defineConfig, loadEnv } from "vite";

const Env = type({
	PORT: "number.port",
	VITE_API_URL: "string",
});

export default defineConfig(({ mode }) => {
	const env = arkenv(Env, loadEnv(mode, process.cwd(), ""));

	return {
		plugins: [arkenvVitePlugin(Env)],
		server: {
			port: env.PORT,
		},
	};
});
```

Note how the schema is defined once but used in two different places: 

1. Environment variables needed for the Vite config (`PORT`) are available via `loadEnv()` and validated by ArkEnv. These server-only variables are not exposed to client code.
2. Public `VITE_*` variables that should be available in your client code (like `VITE_API_URL`) are validated by the `@arkenv/vite-plugin`. The plugin automatically filters the schema to only expose variables matching the Vite prefix (defaults to `VITE_`), preventing server-only variables from leaking into the client bundle.

<Cards>
	<Card icon={<Globe aria-hidden="true" />} title="Using Environment Variables in Config (Vite docs)" href="https://vite.dev/config/#using-environment-variables-in-config" />
</Cards>
