apps/www/content/docs/vite-plugin/index.mdx, before:

---
title: What is the Vite plugin?
---

This is the Vite plugin for ArkEnv. It validates environment variables at build-time with ArkEnv.

```ts title="vite.config.ts"
import arkenv from "@arkenv/vite-plugin";
import { defineConfig } from "vite";

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [
    arkenv({
      VITE_API_URL: "string",
      VITE_APP_NAME: "'MyApp' | 'TestApp'",
      VITE_DEBUG: 'boolean = false'
    }),
  ],
});
```

With this setup, if any environment variable is missing or invalid, your dev server won't start and your production build will fail with an error:

```bash title="Terminal"
ArkEnvError: Errors found while validating environment variables
  HOST must be a string or "localhost" (was missing)
  PORT must be an integer between 0 and 65535 (was "hello")
```

> [!NOTE]
> The plugin automatically filters environment variables to only expose those matching Vite's configured prefix (defaults to `VITE_`). Server-only variables without the prefix are automatically excluded from the client bundle. If you _do_ need to use non-prefixed variables, see [Using ArkEnv in Vite config](/docs/vite-plugin/arkenv-in-viteconfig).

> [!TIP]
> We strongly recommend making `import.meta.env` fully typesafe by augmenting it with your schema. See [Typing import.meta.env](/docs/vite-plugin/typing-import-meta-env) for quick, one-time setup.

Commit message:

Update documentation for ArkEnv and Vite plugin
- Modified titles and icons in several documentation files for consistency and clarity.
- Enhanced the description in the Vite plugin index to provide a clearer introduction.
- Updated important notes regarding the installation of the core `arkenv` package in multiple files to improve user guidance.
- Added a new section for installation instructions in the Vite plugin documentation.

These changes aim to improve the overall user experience and understanding of the ArkEnv and Vite integration.

apps/www/content/docs/vite-plugin/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Introduction
icon: Album
---

## What is this?

The Vite plugin for ArkEnv lets you validate environment variables at build-time with ArkEnv.

```ts title="vite.config.ts"
import arkenv from "@arkenv/vite-plugin";
import { defineConfig } from "vite";

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [
    arkenv({
      VITE_API_URL: "string",
      VITE_APP_NAME: "'MyApp' | 'TestApp'",
      VITE_DEBUG: 'boolean = false'
    }),
  ],
});
```

With this setup, if any environment variable is missing or invalid, your dev server won't start and your production build will fail with an error:

```bash title="Terminal"
ArkEnvError: Errors found while validating environment variables
  HOST must be a string or "localhost" (was missing)
  PORT must be an integer between 0 and 65535 (was "hello")
```

## Installation

```package-install
@arkenv/vite-plugin arktype
```

For some workflows (including [using ArkEnv in Vite config](/docs/vite-plugin/arkenv-in-viteconfig) and [typing import.meta.env](/docs/vite-plugin/typing-import-meta-env)), a dedicated `arkenv` installation is needed. See [ArkEnv quickstart](/docs/arkenv/quickstart) for more instructions.
