apps/www/content/docs/vite-plugin/typing-import-meta-env.mdx, before:

---
title: Typing import.meta.env
---

For most use cases, you'll want to access your environment variables in your client code. [In a Vite project, this is done via `import.meta.env`](https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode).

With ArkEnv, this can be typesafe with a one-time project setup: add a small file in your `src` directory and ensure your `Env` schema is defined in `vite.config.ts` (or exported from a separate file).

> [!NOTE]
> After you complete this setup, each time you add/remove environment variables from your schema, your `import.meta.env` will always be typesafe - no codegen needed.

## Setup

Add this to a `vite-env.d.ts` file in your `src` directory:

```ts title="src/vite-env.d.ts"
/// <reference types="vite/client" />

type ImportMetaEnvAugmented =
	import("@arkenv/vite-plugin").ImportMetaEnvAugmented<
		typeof import("../vite.config").Env
	>;

interface ViteTypeOptions {
	// By adding this line, you can make the type of ImportMetaEnv strict
	// to disallow unknown keys.
	// See: https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode#intellisense-for-typescript
	// ⚠️ This option requires Vite 6.3.x or higher
	strictImportMetaEnv: unknown;
}

// Augment import.meta.env with your schema
// Only `VITE_*` prefixed variables will be included
interface ImportMetaEnv extends ImportMetaEnvAugmented {}
```

## Usage

Once set up, `import.meta.env` is fully typesafe:

```ts title="src/App.tsx"
// TypeScript knows about your VITE_* variables
const apiUrl = import.meta.env.VITE_API_URL; // ✅ Typesafe
const port = import.meta.env.PORT; // ❌ Error: PORT is not in ImportMetaEnv

// Autocomplete works too!
import.meta.env.VITE_ // Shows all your VITE_* variables
```

## How it works

The `ImportMetaEnvAugmented` type:

1. Extracts the inferred type from your schema (the result of `type()` from arkenv)
2. Filters to only include variables matching the Vite prefix (defaults to `"VITE_"`)
3. Makes them available on `import.meta.env` with full type safety

Server-only variables (like `PORT`) are automatically excluded from the client bundle and won't appear in `import.meta.env`.

Read more in [the Vite documentation](https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode#intellisense-for-typescript).

## As your project grows

You might want to define your schema in a dedicated file for better organization:

```ts title="src/env.ts"
import { type } from "arkenv";

export const Env = type({
	PORT: "number.port",
	VITE_API_URL: "string",
	VITE_API_KEY: "string",
	VITE_MY_NUMBER: type("string").pipe((str) => Number.parseInt(str, 10)),
	VITE_MY_BOOLEAN: type("string").pipe((str) => str === "true"),
});

export type Env = typeof Env.infer;
```

```ts title="vite.config.ts"
import arkenvVitePlugin from "@arkenv/vite-plugin";
import { defineConfig } from "vite";
import { Env } from "./src/env";

export default defineConfig({
	plugins: [arkenvVitePlugin(Env)],
});
```

```ts title="src/vite-env.d.ts"
/// <reference types="vite/client" />

type ImportMetaEnvAugmented =
	import("@arkenv/vite-plugin").ImportMetaEnvAugmented<
		typeof import("./env").Env
	>;

interface ViteTypeOptions {
	strictImportMetaEnv: unknown;
}

interface ImportMetaEnv extends ImportMetaEnvAugmented {}
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Imports will break type augmentation**
>
> If the `ImportMetaEnv` augmentation does not work, make sure you do not have any `import` statements in `vite-env.d.ts`. See [the TypeScript documentation](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/modules.html#how-javascript-modules-are-defined) for more information.

## Credit
This implementation is inspired by [vite-plugin-validate-env](https://github.com/Julien-R44/vite-plugin-validate-env#typing-importmetaenv) by [Julien-R44](https://github.com/Julien-R44).

Commit message:

Update documentation for ArkEnv and Vite plugin
- Modified titles and icons in several documentation files for consistency and clarity.
- Enhanced the description in the Vite plugin index to provide a clearer introduction.
- Updated important notes regarding the installation of the core `arkenv` package in multiple files to improve user guidance.
- Added a new section for installation instructions in the Vite plugin documentation.

These changes aim to improve the overall user experience and understanding of the ArkEnv and Vite integration.

apps/www/content/docs/vite-plugin/typing-import-meta-env.mdx, after:

---
title: Typing import.meta.env
icon: ShieldCheck
---

For most use cases, you'll want to access your environment variables in your client code. [In a Vite project, this is done via `import.meta.env`](https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode).

With ArkEnv, this can be typesafe with the one-time setup below. After this, each time you add/remove environment variables from your schema, your `import.meta.env` will always be typesafe - no codegen needed.

## Setup

> [!IMPORTANT]
> You must have the core `arkenv` package installed as a dependency in your project. See [ArkEnv quickstart](/docs/arkenv/quickstart) for instructions.


Add this to a `vite-env.d.ts` file in your `src` directory:

```ts title="src/vite-env.d.ts"
/// <reference types="vite/client" />

type ImportMetaEnvAugmented =
	import("@arkenv/vite-plugin").ImportMetaEnvAugmented<
		typeof import("../vite.config").Env
	>;

interface ViteTypeOptions {
	// By adding this line, you can make the type of ImportMetaEnv strict
	// to disallow unknown keys.
	// See: https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode#intellisense-for-typescript
	// ⚠️ This option requires Vite 6.3.x or higher
	strictImportMetaEnv: unknown;
}

// Augment import.meta.env with your schema
// Only `VITE_*` prefixed variables will be included
interface ImportMetaEnv extends ImportMetaEnvAugmented {}
```

## Usage

Once set up, `import.meta.env` is fully typesafe:

```ts title="src/app.tsx"
// TypeScript knows about your VITE_* variables
const apiUrl = import.meta.env.VITE_API_URL; // ✅ Typesafe
const port = import.meta.env.PORT; // ❌ Error: PORT is not in ImportMetaEnv

// Autocomplete works too!
import.meta.env.VITE_ // Shows all your VITE_* variables
```

## How it works

The `ImportMetaEnvAugmented` type:

1. Extracts the inferred type from your schema (the result of `type()` from arkenv)
2. Filters to only include variables matching the Vite prefix (defaults to `"VITE_"`)
3. Makes them available on `import.meta.env` with full type safety

Server-only variables (like `PORT`) are automatically excluded from the client bundle and won't appear in `import.meta.env`.

Read more in [the Vite documentation](https://vite.dev/guide/env-and-mode#intellisense-for-typescript).

## As your project grows

You might want to define your schema in a dedicated file for better organization:

```ts title="src/env.ts"
import { type } from "arkenv";

export const Env = type({
	PORT: "number.port",
	VITE_API_URL: "string",
	VITE_API_KEY: "string",
	VITE_MY_NUMBER: type("string").pipe((str) => Number.parseInt(str, 10)),
	VITE_MY_BOOLEAN: type("string").pipe((str) => str === "true"),
});

export type Env = typeof Env.infer;
```

```ts title="vite.config.ts"
import arkenvVitePlugin from "@arkenv/vite-plugin";
import { defineConfig } from "vite";
import { Env } from "./src/env";

export default defineConfig({
	plugins: [arkenvVitePlugin(Env)],
});
```

```ts title="src/vite-env.d.ts"
/// <reference types="vite/client" />

type ImportMetaEnvAugmented =
	import("@arkenv/vite-plugin").ImportMetaEnvAugmented<
		typeof import("./env").Env
	>;

interface ViteTypeOptions {
	strictImportMetaEnv: unknown;
}

interface ImportMetaEnv extends ImportMetaEnvAugmented {}
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Imports will break type augmentation**
>
> If the `ImportMetaEnv` augmentation does not work, make sure you do not have any `import` statements in `vite-env.d.ts`. See [the TypeScript documentation](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/modules.html#how-javascript-modules-are-defined) for more information.

## Credit
This implementation is inspired by [vite-plugin-validate-env](https://github.com/Julien-R44/vite-plugin-validate-env#typing-importmetaenv) by [Julien-R44](https://github.com/Julien-R44).
