CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to ArkEnv

Thank you for considering a contribution to ArkEnv! As an open source project, ArkEnv welcomes contributions of all kinds.


## Development Setup

1. ### Install pnpm

   ```sh
   curl -fsSL https://get.pnpm.io/install.sh | sh -
   ```
   (Or follow the instructions in the [pnpm docs](https://pnpm.io/installation))

2. ### Clone the repository

   ```sh
   git clone https://github.com/yamcodes/arkenv.git
   cd arkenv
   ```

3. ### Install dependencies

   ```sh
   pnpm install
   ```

## Making Changes

1. Fork the repository and create your branch from `main`
2. If you've added code that should be tested, add tests
3. Ensure the test suite passes
4. Update the documentation if needed
5. Create a changeset for your changes:
   ```sh
   pnpm changeset
   ```
   This will prompt you to:
   - Select which packages you want to release
   - Choose the type of version bump (major/minor/patch)
   - Provide a summary of the changes
6. Commit the generated changeset file along with your changes
7. Issue that pull request!

## Changesets

[Changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) is used to manage versions and changelogs. Each PR that makes changes to the functionality of the package should include a changeset.

To create a changeset:
1. Run `pnpm changeset`
2. Follow the prompts to describe your changes
3. Commit the generated `.changeset/*.md` file

The changeset will be automatically used to bump versions and update the changelog when your PR is merged.

## All Contributors

We use the [All Contributors](https://allcontributors.org/) specification to recognize all contributions.

If you've contributed to the project, please add yourself! We have a bot setup to make this easy. You can comment on your Pull Request or Issue with:

`@all-contributors please add @<your-username> for <contributions>`

For example:

`@all-contributors please add @yamcodes for code, doc`

For a full list of contribution types and more details on how to use the bot, please refer to the [bot usage documentation](https://allcontributors.org/bot/usage).

## License

By contributing your code to the ArkEnv GitHub repository, you agree to license your contributions under the MIT License.

Commit message:

Add deploy rate limiter (#751)
Closes #605 

<!-- This is an auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai
-->
## Summary by CodeRabbit

* **New Features**
* Preview deployments are rate-limited (daily cap + per-PR cooldown) and
may be skipped when limits apply; production deployments emit alerts
when thresholds are exceeded.
  * CI workflows now gate preview deploy steps based on budget checks.

* **Documentation**
* CONTRIBUTING, design, and spec docs updated with deployment rate
limiter details.

* **Chores**
* Deployment metrics file ignored and persisted across CI runs via
caching.

<sub>✏️ Tip: You can customize this high-level summary in your review
settings.</sub>
<!-- end of auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai -->

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to ArkEnv

Thank you for considering a contribution to ArkEnv! As an open source project, ArkEnv welcomes contributions of all kinds.


## Development Setup

1. ### Install pnpm

   ```sh
   curl -fsSL https://get.pnpm.io/install.sh | sh -
   ```
   (Or follow the instructions in the [pnpm docs](https://pnpm.io/installation))

2. ### Clone the repository

   ```sh
   git clone https://github.com/yamcodes/arkenv.git
   cd arkenv
   ```

3. ### Install dependencies

   ```sh
   pnpm install
   ```

## Making Changes

1. Fork the repository and create your branch from `main`
2. If you've added code that should be tested, add tests
3. Ensure the test suite passes
4. Update the documentation if needed
5. Create a changeset for your changes:
   ```sh
   pnpm changeset
   ```
   This will prompt you to:
   - Select which packages you want to release
   - Choose the type of version bump (major/minor/patch)
   - Provide a summary of the changes
6. Commit the generated changeset file along with your changes
7. Issue that pull request!

## Deployment Rate Limiter

To manage Vercel resource usage, we implement a soft rate limiter for preview deployments:
- **Daily Limit**: 72 preview deployments per 24 hours.
- **Cooldown**: 20 minutes between deployments on the same PR.

If the limit or cooldown is reached, the deployment step in the GitHub Action will be skipped. This is a "soft" limit—it doesn't fail the build, it just pauses deployments. Production deployments are not gated but will trigger an alert if frequency exceeds 24/day.

## Changesets

[Changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) is used to manage versions and changelogs. Each PR that makes changes to the functionality of the package should include a changeset.

To create a changeset:
1. Run `pnpm changeset`
2. Follow the prompts to describe your changes
3. Commit the generated `.changeset/*.md` file

The changeset will be automatically used to bump versions and update the changelog when your PR is merged.

## All Contributors

We use the [All Contributors](https://allcontributors.org/) specification to recognize all contributions.

If you've contributed to the project, please add yourself! We have a bot setup to make this easy. You can comment on your Pull Request or Issue with:

`@all-contributors please add @<your-username> for <contributions>`

For example:

`@all-contributors please add @yamcodes for code, doc`

For a full list of contribution types and more details on how to use the bot, please refer to the [bot usage documentation](https://allcontributors.org/bot/usage).

## License

By contributing your code to the ArkEnv GitHub repository, you agree to license your contributions under the MIT License.
