TESTING.md, before:

# Testing Strategy

This project uses focused testing that combines unit tests with integration tests using examples as fixtures.

## Testing Philosophy

**"Examples as Test Fixtures"** - Examples serve dual purposes:
1. **Documentation** - Show real-world usage patterns
2. **Test Fixtures** - Provide real projects to test against

This ensures the library works in real scenarios while keeping examples clean.

## Component Testing Philosophy

**Test behavior, not aesthetics.** Focus on what users can do and what the component guarantees through its API.

### What We Test
- **Public API** - props, events, and component contract
- **User behavior** - clicks, typing, focus, keyboard, ARIA
- **State transitions** - loading, success, error, disabled states
- **Accessibility** - focus order, keyboard activation, aria attributes
- **Side effects** - UI changes that affect user experience

### What We Don't Test
- Pure styling or CSS classes
- Library internals (Radix/shadcn/MUI)
- Implementation details (hooks, setState, private variables)
- Visual variants (use Storybook instead)

### Testing Rules
- Use Testing Library + user-event for real user simulation
- Query by role, name, label, and text (accessibility first)
- Mock at component boundaries (network, time, context)
- Keep tests fast, deterministic, and parallelizable
- Co-locate tests: `Component.tsx` next to `Component.test.tsx`

## Test Structure

### Unit Tests (`packages/arkenv/src/*.test.ts`)
- Test individual functions and edge cases
- Validate error handling and type checking
- Fast, isolated tests for core logic

### Integration Tests (`packages/vite-plugin/src/*.test.ts`)
- Test the vite plugin using the `with-vite-react-ts` example as a fixture
- Validate that the plugin works with real Vite projects
- Ensure environment variable injection works correctly

## Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pnpm test -- --run

# Run only unit tests
pnpm test --project arkenv -- --run

# Run only vite plugin tests
pnpm test --project vite-plugin -- --run
```

## Test Coverage

### Core Package (`arkenv`)
- ✅ Environment variable parsing and validation
- ✅ Type checking and error handling
- ✅ Default value handling
- ✅ Custom type validation (host, port, etc.)

### Vite Plugin (`@arkenv/vite-plugin`)
- ✅ Plugin integration with Vite
- ✅ Environment variable loading and injection
- ✅ Real project build testing using the example as a fixture
- ✅ Error handling for missing environment variables

## Examples

Examples are kept clean and focused on demonstrating usage:
- `examples/basic` - Basic Node.js usage
- `examples/with-bun` - Bun runtime usage  
- `examples/with-vite-react-ts` - Vite plugin usage (also used as test fixture)

## CI Integration

The CI pipeline runs:
- Unit tests for core functionality
- Integration tests for the vite plugin using real examples
- Ensures no regressions in real-world usage scenarios

Commit message:

Enhance testing documentation and strategy
Updated the testing strategy in TESTING.md to reflect a more comprehensive approach, incorporating unit, integration, and end-to-end tests. Added detailed sections on end-to-end testing, including user journey validation and cross-browser compatibility. Updated test running instructions to include end-to-end test commands. Adjusted the ignore rules in the config.json to exclude specific directories from testing.

This update aims to improve clarity and ensure thorough testing coverage across the project.

TESTING.md, after:

# Testing Strategy

This project uses a comprehensive testing approach that combines unit tests, integration tests, and end-to-end tests to ensure reliability across all layers.

## Testing Philosophy

**"Examples as Test Fixtures"** - Examples serve dual purposes:
1. **Documentation** - Show real-world usage patterns
2. **Test Fixtures** - Provide real projects to test against

**"Test the User Journey"** - End-to-end tests validate complete user workflows in real applications.

This ensures the library works in real scenarios while keeping examples clean and validating user experiences.

## Component Testing Philosophy

**Test behavior, not aesthetics.** Focus on what users can do and what the component guarantees through its API.

### What We Test
- **Public API** - props, events, and component contract
- **User behavior** - clicks, typing, focus, keyboard, ARIA
- **State transitions** - loading, success, error, disabled states
- **Accessibility** - focus order, keyboard activation, aria attributes
- **Side effects** - UI changes that affect user experience

### What We Don't Test
- Pure styling or CSS classes
- Library internals (Radix/shadcn/MUI)
- Implementation details (hooks, setState, private variables)
- Visual variants (use Storybook instead)

### Testing Rules
- Use Testing Library + user-event for real user simulation
- Query by role, name, label, and text (accessibility first)
- Mock at component boundaries (network, time, context)
- Keep tests fast, deterministic, and parallelizable
- Co-locate tests: `Component.tsx` next to `Component.test.tsx`

## Test Structure

### Unit Tests (`packages/arkenv/src/*.test.ts`)
- Test individual functions and edge cases
- Validate error handling and type checking
- Fast, isolated tests for core logic

### Integration Tests (`packages/vite-plugin/src/*.test.ts`)
- Test the vite plugin using the `with-vite-react-ts` example as a fixture
- Validate that the plugin works with real Vite projects
- Ensure environment variable injection works correctly

### End-to-End Tests (`tooling/playwright-www/`)
- Test complete user workflows in the www application
- Validate real browser behavior across Chromium, Firefox, and WebKit
- Ensure the application works correctly in production-like environments
- Catch integration issues that unit tests might miss

## Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pnpm test -- --run

# Run only unit tests
pnpm test --project arkenv -- --run

# Run only vite plugin tests
pnpm test --project vite-plugin -- --run

# Run end-to-end tests
pnpm run test:e2e

# Run e2e tests with UI
pnpm run test:e2e:ui

# Run e2e tests in headed mode
pnpm run test:e2e:headed
```

## Test Coverage

### Core Package (`arkenv`)
- ✅ Environment variable parsing and validation
- ✅ Type checking and error handling
- ✅ Default value handling
- ✅ Custom type validation (host, port, etc.)

### Vite Plugin (`@arkenv/vite-plugin`)
- ✅ Plugin integration with Vite
- ✅ Environment variable loading and injection
- ✅ Real project build testing using the example as a fixture
- ✅ Error handling for missing environment variables

### End-to-End Tests (`www` application)
- ✅ Application loads correctly across all browsers
- ✅ Basic HTML structure validation
- ✅ Console error monitoring and reporting
- ✅ Screenshot capture for visual verification
- ✅ Cross-browser compatibility (Chromium, Firefox, WebKit)

## Examples

Examples are kept clean and focused on demonstrating usage:
- `examples/basic` - Basic Node.js usage
- `examples/with-bun` - Bun runtime usage  
- `examples/with-vite-react-ts` - Vite plugin usage (also used as test fixture)

## CI Integration

The CI pipeline runs:
- Unit tests for core functionality
- Integration tests for the vite plugin using real examples
- End-to-end tests for the www application across multiple browsers
- Ensures no regressions in real-world usage scenarios
- Validates complete user journeys in production-like environments
