apps/www/content/docs/arkenv/coercion.mdx, before:

---
title: Coercion
description: Environment variables are auto-morphed into typesafe numbers, booleans, and more.
---

Traditionally, environment variables are always strings by default. ArkEnv **coerces** these strings into their target types based on your schema, so you only have to think about the types you want.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Coercion is only available in **ArkType mode** (the default). When using `arkenv/standard`, your Standard Schema validators handle their own parsing and type conversion.

## Numbers

Any field defined as a `number` or a numeric subtype (like `number.integer` or `number.port`) will be automatically parsed.

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
// All are numbers! (hover `env` to see)
const env = arkenv({
  PORT: "number.port",
  RETRY_COUNT: "number.integer = 3",
  AGE: "0 <= number.integer <= 120"
});
```

## Booleans

The `boolean` type handles strings like `"true"` and `"false"`.

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
// DEBUG is true if process.env.DEBUG is "true"
const env = arkenv({
  DEBUG: "boolean = false"
});
```

## Arrays

ArkEnv can parse strings into arrays. By default, it splits the string by commas and trims each value.

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
const env = arkenv({
  TAGS: "string[]",
  PORTS: "number[]"
}, {
  env: {
    TAGS: "web, app, api",
    PORTS: "3000, 8080"
  }
});
```

### Array format

If your environment variables use JSON format instead of commas, you can change the `arrayFormat` option:

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
const env = arkenv(
  { TAGS: "string[]" },
  {
    arrayFormat: "json",
    env: { TAGS: '["web", "app"]' }
  }
);
```

## Objects

ArkEnv can parse JSON strings into objects. This is useful for grouping related configuration into a single environment variable.

```ts title="index.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";

const env = arkenv({
  DATABASE: {
    HOST: "string",
    PORT: "number"
  }
}, {
  env: {
    DATABASE: '{"HOST": "localhost", "PORT": "5432"}'
  }
});
```

Coercion works recursively: even variables inside a JSON object are coerced to their correct types (like `PORT` becoming a `number` above).

## How it works

ArkEnv introspects your schema to identify fields that should be numbers, booleans, and other non-string types you define. When you call `createEnv()` (or `arkenv()`), it pre-processes your environment variables to perform these conversions *before* validation.

## Performance

Coercion is highly optimized: ArkEnv performs a one-time introspection of your schema to map out exactly which paths need conversion. At runtime, it only touches the variables that actually need coercion, keeping your startup time virtually identical to manually parsing `process.env`.

## Disabling coercion

You can opt-out of this behavior by setting `coerce` to `false`.

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
// ⚠️ This will throw an error!
// "3000" (string) is not a number.
const env = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: "number.port",
  },
  {
    coerce: false, // < -- Disable coercion
    env: {
      PORT: "3000",
    },
  }
);
```

When coercion is disabled, environment variables are validated **exactly as they are**. Since environment variables are strings, this means validation will fail for `number` or `boolean` fields unless you morph them yourself.

Commit message:

document new standard import mode

apps/www/content/docs/arkenv/coercion.mdx, after:

---
title: Coercion
description: Environment variables are auto-morphed into typesafe numbers, booleans, and more.
---

Traditionally, environment variables are always strings by default. ArkEnv **coerces** these strings into their target types based on your schema, so you only have to think about the types you want.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Coercion is not available in `arkenv/standard` - use your validator's native coercion instead.

## Numbers

Any field defined as a `number` or a numeric subtype (like `number.integer` or `number.port`) will be automatically parsed.

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
// All are numbers! (hover `env` to see)
const env = arkenv({
  PORT: "number.port",
  RETRY_COUNT: "number.integer = 3",
  AGE: "0 <= number.integer <= 120"
});
```

## Booleans

The `boolean` type handles strings like `"true"` and `"false"`.

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
// DEBUG is true if process.env.DEBUG is "true"
const env = arkenv({
  DEBUG: "boolean = false"
});
```

## Arrays

ArkEnv can parse strings into arrays. By default, it splits the string by commas and trims each value.

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
const env = arkenv({
  TAGS: "string[]",
  PORTS: "number[]"
}, {
  env: {
    TAGS: "web, app, api",
    PORTS: "3000, 8080"
  }
});
```

### Array format

If your environment variables use JSON format instead of commas, you can change the `arrayFormat` option:

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
const env = arkenv(
  { TAGS: "string[]" },
  {
    arrayFormat: "json",
    env: { TAGS: '["web", "app"]' }
  }
);
```

## Objects

ArkEnv can parse JSON strings into objects. This is useful for grouping related configuration into a single environment variable.

```ts title="index.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";

const env = arkenv({
  DATABASE: {
    HOST: "string",
    PORT: "number"
  }
}, {
  env: {
    DATABASE: '{"HOST": "localhost", "PORT": "5432"}'
  }
});
```

Coercion works recursively: even variables inside a JSON object are coerced to their correct types (like `PORT` becoming a `number` above).

## How it works

ArkEnv introspects your schema to identify fields that should be numbers, booleans, and other non-string types you define. When you call `createEnv()` (or `arkenv()`), it pre-processes your environment variables to perform these conversions *before* validation.

## Performance

Coercion is highly optimized: ArkEnv performs a one-time introspection of your schema to map out exactly which paths need conversion. At runtime, it only touches the variables that actually need coercion, keeping your startup time virtually identical to manually parsing `process.env`.

## Disabling coercion

You can opt-out of this behavior by setting `coerce` to `false`.

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from "arkenv";
// ---cut---
// ⚠️ This will throw an error!
// "3000" (string) is not a number.
const env = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: "number.port",
  },
  {
    coerce: false, // < -- Disable coercion
    env: {
      PORT: "3000",
    },
  }
);
```

When coercion is disabled, environment variables are validated **exactly as they are**. Since environment variables are strings, this means validation will fail for `number` or `boolean` fields unless you morph them yourself.
