apps/www/content/docs/arkenv/validator-mode.mdx, before:

---
title: Validator mode
description: Configure how ArkEnv validates and coerces your environment variables.
---

ArkEnv supports two validator modes that control how environment variables are parsed and validated.  
You select the mode via the `validator` option in the `arkenv` configuration.

## Cheatsheet - when to use which?

| Feature | `arktype` (default) | `standard` |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **ArkType DSL** | ✅ Native | ⚠️ Via `type(...)` |
| **Standard Schema** (Zod, Valibot, Typia) | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes |
| **Automatic coercion** | ✅ Yes | ❌ Validator-defined |
| **Requires `arktype`** | ✅ Yes | ❌ No |
| **Best for** | New projects, maximal DX | Migrations, ArkType-free setups |

> In a new project, prefer the default `arktype` mode. `standard` exists for migrations and ArkType-free setups.

---

## `validator: "arktype"` (default)

ArkEnv runs validation through [ArkType](https://arktype.io) and expects it to be installed.

### What you get

- Native support for ArkType's string-based DSL (`"string.url"`, `"number > 0"`, etc.)
- Built-in, intuitive coercion from strings
- Full Standard Schema support (Zod, Valibot, etc.)

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';
import { z } from 'zod';

const env = arkenv({
  PORT: "number.port",
  NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production'",
  DATABASE_URL: z.url(),
});
```

### Requirements
You must install `arktype` alongside `arkenv`.

---

## `validator: "standard"`

In Standard mode, ArkEnv works directly with any validator that implements the [Standard Schema](https://standardschema.dev) interface, even without ArkType.

### When this makes sense 
- You already use Zod or Valibot everywhere
- You want a zero-ArkType runtime
- You care more about minimal dependencies than DSL ergonomics

### Tradeoffs

- No native ArkType DSL strings (`"number.port"`, `"string.host"`)
- No ArkType coercion - use your validator's native coercion instead

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';
import { z } from 'zod';

const env = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: z.coerce.number().int().min(0).max(65535),
    DATABASE_URL: z.url(),
  },
  { validator: "standard" }
);
```

### Requirements
A validator that implements Standard Schema (e.g. `zod@^3.24.0`, `valibot@^1.0.0`).

Commit message:

arkenv/standard dedicated import (#806)
<!-- This is an auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai
-->
## Summary by CodeRabbit

* **New Features**
* New public entry points: arkenv/standard (ArkType-free createEnv) and
arkenv/core (core primitives including ArkEnvError and ValidationIssue);
main arkenv now exports the type helper.

* **Breaking Changes**
* Removed arkenv/arktype sub-path. Import the type from arkenv and use
arkenv/standard for Standard Schema flows; createEnv signature
simplified (validator option removed).

* **Documentation**
* Added ARCHITECTURE.md and updated docs/examples to show the new entry
points and migration guidance.
<!-- end of auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai -->

apps/www/content/docs/arkenv/validator-mode.mdx, after:

---
title: Validator mode
description: Configure how ArkEnv validates and coerces your environment variables.
---

ArkEnv supports two validator modes that control how environment variables are parsed and validated.
You select the mode by choosing which entry point you import from.

## Cheatsheet - when to use which?

| Feature | `arkenv` (default) | `arkenv/standard` |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **ArkType DSL** | ✅ Native | ⚠️ Via `type(...)` |
| **Standard Schema** (Zod, Valibot, Typia) | ✅ Yes | ✅ Yes |
| **Automatic coercion** | ✅ Yes | ❌ Validator-defined |
| **Requires `arktype`** | ✅ Yes | ❌ No |
| **Best for** | New projects, maximal DX | Migrations, ArkType-free setups |

> In a new project, prefer `arkenv`. `arkenv/standard` exists for migrations and ArkType-free setups.

---

## `arkenv` (default)

ArkEnv runs validation through [ArkType](https://arktype.io) and expects it to be installed.

### What you get

- Native support for ArkType's string-based DSL (`"string.url"`, `"number > 0"`, etc.)
- Built-in, intuitive coercion from strings
- Full Standard Schema support (Zod, Valibot, etc.)

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';
import { z } from 'zod';

const env = arkenv({
  PORT: "number.port",
  NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production'",
  DATABASE_URL: z.string().url(),
});
```

### Requirements
You must install `arktype` alongside `arkenv`.

---

## `arkenv/standard`

In Standard mode, ArkEnv works directly with any validator that implements the [Standard Schema](https://standardschema.dev) interface, even without ArkType.

### When this makes sense
- You already use Zod or Valibot everywhere
- You want a zero-ArkType runtime
- You care more about minimal dependencies than DSL ergonomics

### Tradeoffs

- No native ArkType DSL strings (`"number.port"`, `"string.host"`)
- No ArkType coercion - use your validator's native coercion instead

```ts twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv/standard';
import { z } from 'zod';

const env = arkenv({
  PORT: z.coerce.number().int().min(0).max(65535),
  DATABASE_URL: z.string().url(),
});
```

### Requirements
A validator that implements Standard Schema (e.g. `zod@^3.24.0`, `valibot@^1.0.0`).
