apps/www/content/docs/index.mdx, before:

---
title: What is ArkEnv?
icon: Album
---

import { BookOpen } from "lucide-react";

ArkEnv is a powerful TypeScript-first environment variable management library that provides runtime validation and typesafety for your application's configuration.

## Key features

- 🔒 **Typesafe**: Full TypeScript support with precise type inference
- 🚀 **Runtime validation**: Catch missing or invalid environment variables early in development
- 💪 **Powered by ArkType**: Built on top of ArkType's powerful type system
- 🪶 **Lightweight**: Only a single dependency ([see size](https://bundlephobia.com/package/arkenv))
- ⚡ **Fast**: Optimized for performance with minimal overhead

## Why ArkEnv?

Managing environment variables in TypeScript applications can be error-prone. Common issues include:
- Missing environment variables causing runtime crashes
- Type mismatches between expected and actual values
- Lack of validation for critical configuration
- No autocomplete or type hints in your IDE

ArkEnv solves these problems by providing a typesafe, validated way to define and use environment variables in your TypeScript applications.

## Quick example

Here's the kind of code you can expect when using ArkEnv:

```ts title="example.ts"
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

const env = arkenv({
  HOST: "string.host",           // Validates IP address or localhost
  PORT: "number.port",           // Ensures valid port number (0-65535)
  NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production' | 'test'",
});

// TypeScript knows the exact types!
console.log(env.HOST);     // string
console.log(env.PORT);     // number
console.log(env.NODE_ENV); // "development" | "production" | "test"
```

## Next steps

<Cards>
  <Card title="Quickstart" href="/docs/quickstart" description="Quickly get started with ArkEnv in your project" />
  <Card title="ArkEnv on GitHub" href="https://github.com/yamcodes/arkenv" description="View the source code and contribute to the project" />
  <Card icon={<BookOpen />} title="ArkType Documentation" href="https://arktype.io/docs" description="Learn more about the underlying type system" className="bg-blue-900" />
</Cards>

Commit message:

Add type function documentation and update quickstart guide

apps/www/content/docs/index.mdx, after:

---
title: What is ArkEnv?
icon: Album
---

import { BookOpen } from "lucide-react";

ArkEnv is a powerful TypeScript-first environment variable management library that provides runtime validation and typesafety for your application's configuration.

## Key features

- 🔒 **Typesafe**: Full TypeScript support with precise type inference
- 🚀 **Runtime validation**: Catch missing or invalid environment variables early in development
- 💪 **Powered by ArkType**: Built on top of ArkType's powerful type system
- 🛠️ **Type function**: Use `type()` to separate schema definition from validation
- 🪶 **Lightweight**: Only a single dependency ([see size](https://bundlephobia.com/package/arkenv))
- ⚡ **Fast**: Optimized for performance with minimal overhead

## Why ArkEnv?

Managing environment variables in TypeScript applications can be error-prone. Common issues include:
- Missing environment variables causing runtime crashes
- Type mismatches between expected and actual values
- Lack of validation for critical configuration
- No autocomplete or type hints in your IDE

ArkEnv solves these problems by providing a typesafe, validated way to define and use environment variables in your TypeScript applications.

## Quick example

Here's the kind of code you can expect when using ArkEnv:

```ts title="example.ts"
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

const env = arkenv({
  HOST: "string.host",           // Validates IP address or localhost
  PORT: "number.port",           // Ensures valid port number (0-65535)
  NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production' | 'test'",
});

// TypeScript knows the exact types!
console.log(env.HOST);     // string
console.log(env.PORT);     // number
console.log(env.NODE_ENV); // "development" | "production" | "test"
```

## Next steps

<Cards>
  <Card title="Quickstart" href="/docs/quickstart" description="Quickly get started with ArkEnv in your project" />
  <Card title="ArkEnv on GitHub" href="https://github.com/yamcodes/arkenv" description="View the source code and contribute to the project" />
  <Card icon={<BookOpen />} title="ArkType Documentation" href="https://arktype.io/docs" description="Learn more about the underlying type system" className="bg-blue-900" />
</Cards>
