apps/www/content/docs/quickstart.mdx, before:

---
title: Quickstart
description: Let's get you started with a few simple steps.
---

<Steps>
  <Step>
    ## Install
    ```package-install
    arkenv arktype
    ```
  </Step>

  <Step>
    ## Configure your project

    Enable strict mode for the best typesafety:

    ```json title="tsconfig.json"
    // [!code word:config]
    {
      "compilerOptions": {
        "strict": true, // [!code focus]
        "moduleResolution": "bundler" // [!code focus] or "node16" / "nodenext"
      }
    }
    ```

    > [!IMPORTANT]
    > **Module Resolution Requirement**: ArkEnv requires modern TypeScript module resolution to properly resolve types. Use one of the following:
    > - `"moduleResolution": "bundler"` - Recommended for modern bundlers (Vite, Next.js, etc.)
    > - `"moduleResolution": "node16"` or `"nodenext"` - For Node.js projects
    > 
    > Older strategies like `"node"` or `"node10"` don't support the `package.json` `exports` field and will cause type errors. If you're using `"module": "commonjs"`, make sure to explicitly set `"moduleResolution": "node16"` or `"nodenext"` (it defaults to `"node10"` otherwise).
    
    ArkEnv is built on top of [ArkType](https://arktype.io/). Follow the [ArkType setup instructions](https://arktype.io/docs/intro/setup) to configure your project.
  </Step>

  <Step>
    ## Define the schema

    Add a schema to make your environment variables **validated** and **typesafe**:

    ```ts title="config/env.ts" twoslash
    import arkenv, { type } from 'arkenv';

    export const env = arkenv({
      // Built-in validators
      DATABASE_HOST: "string.host",
      DATABASE_PORT: "number.port",
      
      // Boolean values (accepts "true"/"false" strings, converts to boolean)
      DEBUG: "boolean",
      
      // Custom string literals
      NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production' | 'test'",
      
      // Optional variables with defaults
      LOG_LEVEL: "'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error' = 'info'",
      
      // Array defaults using type function
      ALLOWED_ORIGINS: type("string[]").default(() => ["localhost"]),
      FEATURE_FLAGS: type("string[]").default(() => []),
      
      // Optional environment variable
      "API_KEY?": 'string'
    });
    ```

    > [!TIP]
    > Improve your DX with *syntax highlighting* in [VS Code & Cursor](/docs/integrations/vscode) or [JetBrains IDEs](/docs/integrations/jetbrains).
  </Step>

  <Step>
    ## Define environment variables

    Create a `.env` file in your project root with some environment variables:

    ```dotenv title=".env"
    DATABASE_HOST=localhost
    DATABASE_PORT=5432
    DEBUG=true
    NODE_ENV=development
    API_KEY=your-secret-key
    ```

    > [!TIP]
    > Avoid [committing your `.env` file to version control](https://12factor.net/config):
    >
    > ```bash
    > echo ".env" >> .gitignore
    > ```

    <Accordions>
      <Accordion title="How to load environment variables from .env files?">
      Each framework has its own best practices. Common ones include:
        - **Next.js**: [Environment Variables](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/environment-variables)
        - **Vite**: [Env Variables and Modes ](https://vitejs.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html)
        - **Nest.js**: [Configuration](https://docs.nestjs.com/techniques/configuration)
        - **Node.js**: [v20.6.0 built-in `.env` file support](https://nodejs.org/en/blog/release/v20.6.0#built-in-env-file-support) or [dotenv](https://github.com/motdotla/dotenv)
  
        <Card
          title="Load environment variables"
          href="/docs/how-to/load-environment-variables"
          description="Learn how to manage environment variables across different environments and deployment scenarios"
        />
      </Accordion>
    </Accordions>
  </Step>

  <Step>
    ## Use in your code

    Import and use your **validated** and **typed** environment variables. Here is an example for a database configuration file:

    ```typescript title="database.ts" twoslash
    // @filename: config/env.ts
    import arkenv from 'arkenv';
    export const env = arkenv({
      DATABASE_HOST: "string.host",
      DATABASE_PORT: "number.port",
      NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production' | 'test'",
      LOG_LEVEL: "'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error' = 'info'",
      "API_KEY?": 'string'
    });
    // @filename: database.ts
    // ---cut---
    import { env } from './config/env';

    // Hover to see your validated config
    const dbConfig = {
      host: env.DATABASE_HOST,
      port: env.DATABASE_PORT,
    };
    ```
  </Step>
</Steps>

Now you might start to see the magic of ArkType and TypeScript working together to make your environment variables more reliable, more readable, and more typesafe.

## Next steps

<Cards>
  <Card 
    title="Integrate with VS Code & Cursor" 
    href="/docs/integrations/vscode"
    description="Get syntax highlighting, ErrorLens, and more"
  />
  <Card 
    title="Integrate with JetBrains IDEs" 
    href="/docs/integrations/jetbrains"
    description="Get syntax highlighting"
  />
  <Card 
    title="Examples" 
    href="/docs/examples#examples"
    description="Dive into ArkEnv with our collection of examples"
  />
  <Card 
    title="How to load environment variables" 
    href="/docs/how-to/load-environment-variables"
    description="Learn environment variables management in different environments and deployment scenarios"
  />
</Cards>

Commit message:

Update quickstart documentation for TypeScript module resolution
- Clarified the requirement for modern TypeScript module resolution in the quickstart guide.
- Replaced the previous emphasis on specific module resolution strategies with a more flexible approach, allowing omission of `moduleResolution` under certain conditions.
- Enhanced the documentation to guide users towards best practices for configuring their TypeScript projects with ArkEnv.

apps/www/content/docs/quickstart.mdx, after:

---
title: Quickstart
description: Let's get you started with a few simple steps.
---

<Steps>
  <Step>
    ## Install
    ```package-install
    arkenv arktype
    ```
  </Step>

  <Step>
    ## Configure your project

    Enable strict mode for the best typesafety, and use a [modern TypeScript module resolution](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#moduleResolution):

    ```json title="tsconfig.json"
    // [!code word:config]
    {
      "compilerOptions": {
        "strict": true, // [!code focus]
        "moduleResolution": "bundler" // [!code focus] or "node16" / "nodenext"
      }
    }
    ```

    > [!TIP]
    > You may omit `moduleResolution` if `module` is `"Preserve", "Node16", or "NodeNext"`. See [Requirements](https://github.com/yamcodes/arkenv?tab=readme-ov-file#requirements) for details.
    
    ArkEnv is built on top of [ArkType](https://arktype.io/). Follow the [ArkType setup instructions](https://arktype.io/docs/intro/setup) to configure your project.
  </Step>

  <Step>
    ## Define the schema

    Add a schema to make your environment variables **validated** and **typesafe**:

    ```ts title="config/env.ts" twoslash
    import arkenv, { type } from 'arkenv';

    export const env = arkenv({
      // Built-in validators
      DATABASE_HOST: "string.host",
      DATABASE_PORT: "number.port",
      
      // Boolean values (accepts "true"/"false" strings, converts to boolean)
      DEBUG: "boolean",
      
      // Custom string literals
      NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production' | 'test'",
      
      // Optional variables with defaults
      LOG_LEVEL: "'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error' = 'info'",
      
      // Array defaults using type function
      ALLOWED_ORIGINS: type("string[]").default(() => ["localhost"]),
      FEATURE_FLAGS: type("string[]").default(() => []),
      
      // Optional environment variable
      "API_KEY?": 'string'
    });
    ```

    > [!TIP]
    > Improve your DX with *syntax highlighting* in [VS Code & Cursor](/docs/integrations/vscode) or [JetBrains IDEs](/docs/integrations/jetbrains).
  </Step>

  <Step>
    ## Define environment variables

    Create a `.env` file in your project root with some environment variables:

    ```dotenv title=".env"
    DATABASE_HOST=localhost
    DATABASE_PORT=5432
    DEBUG=true
    NODE_ENV=development
    API_KEY=your-secret-key
    ```

    > [!TIP]
    > Avoid [committing your `.env` file to version control](https://12factor.net/config):
    >
    > ```bash
    > echo ".env" >> .gitignore
    > ```

    <Accordions>
      <Accordion title="How to load environment variables from .env files?">
      Each framework has its own best practices. Common ones include:
        - **Next.js**: [Environment Variables](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/environment-variables)
        - **Vite**: [Env Variables and Modes ](https://vitejs.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html)
        - **Nest.js**: [Configuration](https://docs.nestjs.com/techniques/configuration)
        - **Node.js**: [v20.6.0 built-in `.env` file support](https://nodejs.org/en/blog/release/v20.6.0#built-in-env-file-support) or [dotenv](https://github.com/motdotla/dotenv)
  
        <Card
          title="Load environment variables"
          href="/docs/how-to/load-environment-variables"
          description="Learn how to manage environment variables across different environments and deployment scenarios"
        />
      </Accordion>
    </Accordions>
  </Step>

  <Step>
    ## Use in your code

    Import and use your **validated** and **typed** environment variables. Here is an example for a database configuration file:

    ```typescript title="database.ts" twoslash
    // @filename: config/env.ts
    import arkenv from 'arkenv';
    export const env = arkenv({
      DATABASE_HOST: "string.host",
      DATABASE_PORT: "number.port",
      NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production' | 'test'",
      LOG_LEVEL: "'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error' = 'info'",
      "API_KEY?": 'string'
    });
    // @filename: database.ts
    // ---cut---
    import { env } from './config/env';

    // Hover to see your validated config
    const dbConfig = {
      host: env.DATABASE_HOST,
      port: env.DATABASE_PORT,
    };
    ```
  </Step>
</Steps>

Now you might start to see the magic of ArkType and TypeScript working together to make your environment variables more reliable, more readable, and more typesafe.

## Next steps

<Cards>
  <Card 
    title="Integrate with VS Code & Cursor" 
    href="/docs/integrations/vscode"
    description="Get syntax highlighting, ErrorLens, and more"
  />
  <Card 
    title="Integrate with JetBrains IDEs" 
    href="/docs/integrations/jetbrains"
    description="Get syntax highlighting"
  />
  <Card 
    title="Examples" 
    href="/docs/examples#examples"
    description="Dive into ArkEnv with our collection of examples"
  />
  <Card 
    title="How to load environment variables" 
    href="/docs/how-to/load-environment-variables"
    description="Learn environment variables management in different environments and deployment scenarios"
  />
</Cards>
