apps/www/content/docs/bun-plugin/index.mdx, before:

---
title: Introduction
icon: Album
---

## What is this?

The ArkEnv plugin for Bun lets you validate environment variables at build-time and runtime with ArkEnv.

It supports a **simple setup** for most projects, automatically discovering your schema from `./src/env.ts` or `./env.ts`.

## Usage

### Simple setup (recommended)

The simple setup automatically discovers your schema from `src/env.ts` or `env.ts`. This requires configuration in **both** `bunfig.toml` (for `Bun.serve`) and your build script (for `Bun.build`).

#### 1. Create your schema

```ts title="src/env.ts" twoslash
import { type } from "arkenv/arktype";

export default type({
  BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL: "string",
  BUN_PUBLIC_DEBUG: "boolean",
});
```

#### 2. Configure for Bun.serve (dev mode)

```toml title="bunfig.toml"
[serve.static]
plugins = ["@arkenv/bun-plugin"]
```

#### 3. Configure for Bun.build (build mode)

```ts title="build.ts"
import arkenv from "@arkenv/bun-plugin";

await Bun.build({
  entrypoints: ["./app.tsx"],
  outdir: "./dist",
  plugins: [arkenv], // Auto-discovers src/env.ts
});
```

### Advanced setup

If you need to customize the schema location or prefer explicit configuration:

#### For Bun.build

Pass your schema directly to the plugin function:

```ts title="build.ts"
import arkenv from "@arkenv/bun-plugin";
import { type } from "arkenv/arktype";

const Env = type({
  BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL: "string",
  BUN_PUBLIC_DEBUG: "boolean",
});

await Bun.build({
  entrypoints: ["./app.tsx"],
  outdir: "./dist",
  plugins: [arkenv(Env)],
});
```

#### For Bun.serve

Create a custom plugin file and reference it in `bunfig.toml`:

```ts title="plugins/arkenv.ts"
import arkenv from "@arkenv/bun-plugin";
import { type } from "arkenv/arktype";

const Env = type({
  BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL: "string",
  BUN_PUBLIC_DEBUG: "boolean",
});

export default arkenv(Env);
```

```toml title="bunfig.toml"
[serve.static]
plugins = ["./plugins/arkenv.ts"]
```

## Features

- **Static Analysis**: Automatically replaces `process.env.VARIABLE` with validated values during the build.
- **Typesafety**: Ensures your code only accesses variables defined in your schema.
- **Secure Defaults**: Only exposes variables prefixed with `BUN_PUBLIC_` to the client bundle. You can customize this prefix by setting the `env` option in your `Bun.build()` configuration (e.g., `env: "MY_PUBLIC_*"` to use `MY_PUBLIC_` instead). See [Bun's bundler documentation](https://bun.sh/docs/bundler#env) for more details.

## Installation

```package-install
@arkenv/bun-plugin arkenv arktype
```

Commit message:

Update plugin docs with note of not supporting `"standard"` validator mode + align node versions to LTS (#745)
Closes #744 

<!-- This is an auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai
-->
## Summary by CodeRabbit

* **Documentation**
* Clarified that ArkType is required for Bun and Vite plugins;
validator: "standard" is unsupported, with guidance to use ArkType’s DSL
alongside Zod or Valibot.

* **Chores**
* Updated dev/type dependency versions and replaced select dev plugins
for consistency.
  * Standardized TypeScript targets to ES2023 across projects.
* Made path resolution configuration explicit in build tooling and added
a dev→build task dependency.
  * Added editor-on-save actions for import organization and fixes.

<sub>✏️ Tip: You can customize this high-level summary in your review
settings.</sub>
<!-- end of auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai -->

apps/www/content/docs/bun-plugin/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Introduction
icon: Album
---

## What is this?

The ArkEnv plugin for Bun lets you validate environment variables at build-time and runtime with ArkEnv.

It supports a **simple setup** for most projects, automatically discovering your schema from `./src/env.ts` or `./env.ts`.

## Usage

### Simple setup (recommended)

The simple setup automatically discovers your schema from `src/env.ts` or `env.ts`. This requires configuration in **both** `bunfig.toml` (for `Bun.serve`) and your build script (for `Bun.build`).

#### 1. Create your schema

```ts title="src/env.ts" twoslash
import { type } from "arkenv/arktype";

export default type({
  BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL: "string",
  BUN_PUBLIC_DEBUG: "boolean",
});
```

#### 2. Configure for Bun.serve (dev mode)

```toml title="bunfig.toml"
[serve.static]
plugins = ["@arkenv/bun-plugin"]
```

#### 3. Configure for Bun.build (build mode)

```ts title="build.ts"
import arkenv from "@arkenv/bun-plugin";

await Bun.build({
  entrypoints: ["./app.tsx"],
  outdir: "./dist",
  plugins: [arkenv], // Auto-discovers src/env.ts
});
```

### Advanced setup

If you need to customize the schema location or prefer explicit configuration:

#### For Bun.build

Pass your schema directly to the plugin function:

```ts title="build.ts"
import arkenv from "@arkenv/bun-plugin";
import { type } from "arkenv/arktype";

const Env = type({
  BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL: "string",
  BUN_PUBLIC_DEBUG: "boolean",
});

await Bun.build({
  entrypoints: ["./app.tsx"],
  outdir: "./dist",
  plugins: [arkenv(Env)],
});
```

#### For Bun.serve

Create a custom plugin file and reference it in `bunfig.toml`:

```ts title="plugins/arkenv.ts"
import arkenv from "@arkenv/bun-plugin";
import { type } from "arkenv/arktype";

const Env = type({
  BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL: "string",
  BUN_PUBLIC_DEBUG: "boolean",
});

export default arkenv(Env);
```

```toml title="bunfig.toml"
[serve.static]
plugins = ["./plugins/arkenv.ts"]
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> This plugin requires `arktype` to be installed in your project.
>
> It does not support `validator: "standard"`.
> You can still use Zod or Valibot schemas alongside ArkType's DSL, since ArkType natively supports Standard Schema.
>
> See [Standard Schema integration](/docs/arkenv/integrations/standard-schema) for details.

## Features

- **Static Analysis**: Automatically replaces `process.env.VARIABLE` with validated values during the build.
- **Typesafety**: Ensures your code only accesses variables defined in your schema.
- **Secure Defaults**: Only exposes variables prefixed with `BUN_PUBLIC_` to the client bundle. You can customize this prefix by setting the `env` option in your `Bun.build()` configuration (e.g., `env: "MY_PUBLIC_*"` to use `MY_PUBLIC_` instead). See [Bun's bundler documentation](https://bun.sh/docs/bundler#env) for more details.

## Installation

```package-install
@arkenv/bun-plugin arkenv arktype
```
