apps/www/content/docs/bun-plugin/typing-process-env.mdx, before:

---
title: Typing process.env
icon: ShieldCheck
---

For most use cases, you'll want to access your environment variables in your client code. [In a Bun project, this is done via `process.env`](https://bun.sh/docs/runtime/env).

With ArkEnv, this can be typesafe with the one-time setup below. After this, each time you add/remove environment variables from your schema, your `process.env` will always be typesafe - no codegen needed.

## Setup

> [!IMPORTANT]
> You must have the core `arkenv` package installed as a dependency in your project. See [ArkEnv quickstart](/docs/arkenv/quickstart) for instructions.

Add this to a `bun-env.d.ts` file in your project root:

```ts title="bun-env.d.ts"
/// <reference types="bun-types" />

type ProcessEnvAugmented = import("@arkenv/bun-plugin").ProcessEnvAugmented<
	typeof import("./src/env").default
>;

declare namespace NodeJS {
	interface ProcessEnv extends ProcessEnvAugmented {}
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Notice the line that references `"./src/env"` - if your `env.ts` file is somewhere else (say, `"./env"`), update it accordingly.

## Usage

Once set up, `process.env` is fully typesafe for your `BUN_PUBLIC_*` variables:

```ts title="src/app.tsx"
// TypeScript knows about your BUN_PUBLIC_* variables
const apiUrl = process.env.BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL; // ✅ Typesafe
const debug = process.env.BUN_PUBLIC_DEBUG; // ✅ Typesafe
```

## How it works

The `ProcessEnvAugmented` type:

1. Extracts the inferred type from your schema (the result of `type()` from arkenv)
2. Filters to only include variables matching the Bun prefix (defaults to `"BUN_PUBLIC_"`)
3. Makes them available on `process.env` with full type safety

Server-only variables (like `PORT`) are automatically excluded from the client bundle and won't appear in the augmented `process.env` type.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Imports will break type augmentation**
>
> If the `ProcessEnv` augmentation does not work, make sure you do not have any `import` statements in `bun-env.d.ts`. See [the TypeScript documentation](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/modules.html#how-javascript-modules-are-defined) for more information.

Commit message:

Add `AllowedKeys` typing to Bun plugin (#814)
Natural continuation of #804 - that was the runtime change, this PR is
the typing change.

<!-- This is an auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai
-->

## Summary by CodeRabbit

* **New Features**
* Added NODE_ENV support in environment schemas with automatic
validation at startup and full type safety when included in the schema.

* **Documentation**
* Updated documentation with NODE_ENV usage examples and typing
guidance.

* **Chores**
  * Updated dependency versions across examples and playgrounds.

<!-- end of auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai -->

apps/www/content/docs/bun-plugin/typing-process-env.mdx, after:

---
title: Typing process.env
icon: ShieldCheck
---

For most use cases, you'll want to access your environment variables in your client code. [In a Bun project, this is done via `process.env`](https://bun.sh/docs/runtime/env).

With ArkEnv, this can be typesafe with the one-time setup below. After this, each time you add/remove environment variables from your schema, your `process.env` will always be typesafe - no codegen needed.

## Setup

> [!IMPORTANT]
> You must have the core `arkenv` package installed as a dependency in your project. See [ArkEnv quickstart](/docs/arkenv/quickstart) for instructions.

Add this to a `bun-env.d.ts` file in your project root:

```ts title="bun-env.d.ts"
/// <reference types="bun-types" />

type ProcessEnvAugmented = import("@arkenv/bun-plugin").ProcessEnvAugmented<
	typeof import("./src/env").default
>;

declare namespace NodeJS {
	interface ProcessEnv extends ProcessEnvAugmented {}
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Notice the line that references `"./src/env"` - if your `env.ts` file is somewhere else (say, `"./env"`), update it accordingly.

## Usage

Once set up, `process.env` is fully typesafe for your `BUN_PUBLIC_*` variables:

```ts title="src/app.tsx"
// TypeScript knows about your BUN_PUBLIC_* variables
const apiUrl = process.env.BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL; // ✅ Typesafe
const debug = process.env.BUN_PUBLIC_DEBUG; // ✅ Typesafe
```

`NODE_ENV` is also supported — when defined in your schema, it is validated and correctly typed:

```ts title="src/env.ts"
import { type } from "arkenv";

export default type({
  BUN_PUBLIC_API_URL: "string.url",
  NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'production' | 'test'",
});
```

```ts title="src/app.tsx"
process.env.NODE_ENV; // ✅ "development" | "production" | "test"
```

## How it works

The `ProcessEnvAugmented` type:

1. Extracts the inferred type from your schema (the result of `type()` from arkenv)
2. Filters to only include variables matching the Bun prefix (defaults to `"BUN_PUBLIC_"`) and `NODE_ENV`
3. Makes them available on `process.env` with full type safety

Server-only variables (like `PORT`) are automatically excluded from the client bundle and won't appear in the augmented `process.env` type.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Imports will break type augmentation**
>
> If the `ProcessEnv` augmentation does not work, make sure you do not have any `import` statements in `bun-env.d.ts`. See [the TypeScript documentation](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/modules.html#how-javascript-modules-are-defined) for more information.
