examples/with-bun/README.md, before:

# ArkEnv Bun example

This example shows how to use ArkEnv in a Bun application.


## What's inside?

The example demonstrates:
- Setting up environment variables with ArkEnv
- Using default values
- Typesafe environment configuration
- Pretty console output with [`util.style`](https://nodejs.org/api/util.html#utilstyletextformat-text-optionsNode.js)

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

Make sure you have [Bun](https://bun.sh) installed:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://bun.sh/install | bash
```

### Quickstart

1. #### Install dependencies
    ```bash
    bun install
    ```

2. #### Start the development server with hot reloading enabled
    ```bash
    bun dev
    ```
    :white_check_mark: You will see the following output:
    ```bash
    🚀 Server running at localhost:3000 in development mode
    ```

### Adding environment variables

With the development server running (if it isn't - just run `bun dev`), let's see how to add a new environment variable. For this example, we'll add a new environment variable called `MY_ENV_VAR`.

1. #### Define the new environment variable in the schema as a _required_ string
    ```typescript
    // index.ts
    const env = arkenv({
        // other definitions...
        MY_ENV_VAR: "string"
    });
    ```

2. #### Notice the development server will show an error
    ```bash
    ArkEnvError: Errors found while validating environment variables
      MY_ENV_VAR must be a string (was missing)
    ```
    This is **good**! It means the environment variable is required and the type is enforced. Let's see how to fix it. For this example, we will define the environment variable [with a `.env` file](https://arkenv.js.org/docs/arkenv/how-to/load-environment-variables#using-env-files).

3. #### Copy the `.env.example` file to `.env`
   
    To keep the development server running, run this command in a new terminal window:
    ```bash
    cp .env.example .env
    ```

4. #### Add a new environment variable to the `.env` file
    ```bash
    echo "MY_ENV_VAR=new_value" >> .env
    ```

5. #### Notice the development server will once again show the success message
    ```bash
    🚀 Server running at localhost:3000 in development mode
    ```
    **Awesome!** Now you can print its value:

6. #### Add the following line to the `index.ts` file
    ```typescript
    console.log(env.MY_ENV_VAR);
    ```
    You will see the following output:
    ```bash
    🚀 Server running at localhost:3000 in development mode
    my_value
    ```
    **Congratulations!** :tada: You've just added a new environment variable and printed its value.

### Next steps

- [ArkEnv docs](https://arkenv.js.org/docs/arkenv)
- [ArkType docs](https://arktype.io/)
- [Bun docs](https://bun.com/docs)

Commit message:

docs: Add an important note to the Bun example README regarding the dedicated Bun plugin and its documentation.

examples/with-bun/README.md, after:

# ArkEnv Bun example

This example shows how to use ArkEnv in a Bun application.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> We provide a first-class ArkEnv plugin for Bun, which is recommended for use in most cases. The example below is a very simple use-case of a Node-like app (no fullstack web server) and only validates at dev time (not ideal).
>
> Until this example is updated, please check out [the plugin's docs](https://arkenv.js.org/docs/bun-plugin) to understand how to use the Bun plugin.

## What's inside?

The example demonstrates:
- Setting up environment variables with ArkEnv
- Using default values
- Typesafe environment configuration
- Pretty console output with [`util.style`](https://nodejs.org/api/util.html#utilstyletextformat-text-optionsNode.js)

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

Make sure you have [Bun](https://bun.sh) installed:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://bun.sh/install | bash
```

### Quickstart

1. #### Install dependencies
    ```bash
    bun install
    ```

2. #### Start the development server with hot reloading enabled
    ```bash
    bun dev
    ```
    :white_check_mark: You will see the following output:
    ```bash
    🚀 Server running at localhost:3000 in development mode
    ```

### Adding environment variables

With the development server running (if it isn't - just run `bun dev`), let's see how to add a new environment variable. For this example, we'll add a new environment variable called `MY_ENV_VAR`.

1. #### Define the new environment variable in the schema as a _required_ string
    ```typescript
    // index.ts
    const env = arkenv({
        // other definitions...
        MY_ENV_VAR: "string"
    });
    ```

2. #### Notice the development server will show an error
    ```bash
    ArkEnvError: Errors found while validating environment variables
      MY_ENV_VAR must be a string (was missing)
    ```
    This is **good**! It means the environment variable is required and the type is enforced. Let's see how to fix it. For this example, we will define the environment variable [with a `.env` file](https://arkenv.js.org/docs/arkenv/how-to/load-environment-variables#using-env-files).

3. #### Copy the `.env.example` file to `.env`
   
    To keep the development server running, run this command in a new terminal window:
    ```bash
    cp .env.example .env
    ```

4. #### Add a new environment variable to the `.env` file
    ```bash
    echo "MY_ENV_VAR=new_value" >> .env
    ```

5. #### Notice the development server will once again show the success message
    ```bash
    🚀 Server running at localhost:3000 in development mode
    ```
    **Awesome!** Now you can print its value:

6. #### Add the following line to the `index.ts` file
    ```typescript
    console.log(env.MY_ENV_VAR);
    ```
    You will see the following output:
    ```bash
    🚀 Server running at localhost:3000 in development mode
    my_value
    ```
    **Congratulations!** :tada: You've just added a new environment variable and printed its value.

### Next steps

- [ArkEnv docs](https://arkenv.js.org/docs/arkenv)
- [ArkType docs](https://arktype.io/)
- [Bun docs](https://bun.com/docs)
