apps/www/content/docs/arkenv/how-to/load-environment-variables.mdx, before:

---
title: How to load environment variables
description: Learn environment variables management in different environments and deployment scenarios.
---

## Local development

### Using `.env` files

The most common way to manage environment variables during development is using `.env` files:

```dotenv title=".env"
DATABASE_HOST=localhost
DATABASE_PORT=5432
NODE_ENV=development
API_KEY=your-secret-key
LOG_LEVEL=debug
```

### Best practices for `.env` files

1. **Document required variables**
   Create a `.env.example` file to document required variables:
   ```dotenv title=".env.example"
   DATABASE_HOST=localhost
   DATABASE_PORT=5432
   NODE_ENV=development
   API_KEY=your-secret-key-here
   LOG_LEVEL=info
   ```

2. **Gitignore configuration**
   Add these patterns to your `.gitignore`:
   ```dotenv title=".gitignore"
   .env
   .env.*
   !.env.example
   ```

3. **Environment-specific files**
   Use different files for different environments:
   - `.env.development` - Development settings
   - `.env.test` - Test environment settings
   - `.env.production` - Production defaults (if needed)

## Loading environment variables

### Using dotenv

The simplest way to load environment variables is using the `dotenv` package:

```typescript title="src/index.ts"
import 'dotenv/config';
// or
import * as dotenv from 'dotenv';
dotenv.config();
```

### Framework-specific solutions

Many frameworks have built-in support for environment variables:

#### Next.js
- Automatically loads `.env*` files
- Supports environment-specific files (`.env.development`, `.env.production`)
- [Next.js Environment Variables Documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/environment-variables)

#### Vite
- Automatically loads `.env` files
- Supports mode-specific files (`.env.development`, `.env.production`)
- [Vite Env Variables Documentation](https://vitejs.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html)

#### Express
```typescript title="src/app.ts"
import express from 'express';
import dotenv from 'dotenv';

dotenv.config();
const app = express();
```

#### Nest.js
```typescript title="src/app.module.ts"
import { ConfigModule } from '@nestjs/config';

@Module({
  imports: [
    ConfigModule.forRoot({
      isGlobal: true,
    }),
  ],
})
```

### Runtime arguments

You can also supply variables when running your application:

```bash
DATABASE_HOST=localhost DATABASE_PORT=5432 npm start
```

## Production deployment

### Cloud platforms

#### AWS
- Use AWS Systems Manager Parameter Store for non-sensitive values
- Use AWS Secrets Manager for sensitive values
- Set environment variables in ECS Task Definitions or Lambda configurations

#### Google Cloud Platform
- Use Cloud Secret Manager for sensitive values
- Set environment variables in Cloud Run or App Engine configurations

#### Azure
- Use Azure Key Vault for sensitive values
- Configure App Settings in Azure App Service

### Container environments

#### Docker

```dockerfile title="Dockerfile"
ENV NODE_ENV=production
```

```yaml title="docker-compose.yml"
services:
  app:
    environment:
      - NODE_ENV=production
      - DATABASE_HOST=db
```

#### Kubernetes
```yaml title="deployment.yaml"
spec:
  containers:
    - name: app
      env:
        - name: NODE_ENV
          value: "production"
        - name: DATABASE_HOST
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              name: app-config
              key: database-host
```

### Traditional hosting

- Set environment variables through the hosting platform's dashboard
- Use deployment scripts to configure environment variables
- Consider using configuration management tools

## Security best practices

1. **Never commit sensitive values**
   - Keep `.env` files out of version control
   - Use secrets management services in production

2. **Use different values per environment**
   - Don't share sensitive credentials between environments
   - Use environment-specific configurations

3. **Access control**
   - Limit access to production environment variables
   - Use role-based access control for secrets management

4. **Encryption**
   - Encrypt sensitive values at rest
   - Use secure channels for transmitting secrets

## Validation and typesafety

ArkEnv helps ensure your environment variables are valid:

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

export const env = arkenv({
  // Required variables with validation
  DATABASE_HOST: "string.host",
  DATABASE_PORT: "number.port",
  
  // Boolean values (accepts "true"/"false" strings, converts to boolean)
  DEBUG: "boolean",
  
  // Optional variables with defaults
  LOG_LEVEL: "'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error' = 'info'",
  
  // Optional variables
  "FEATURE_FLAGS?": 'string[]'
});
```

## Configuration options

ArkEnv supports several configuration options to customize its behavior:

### Validator mode

Choose between ArkType (default) or Standard Schema validators:

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';
import { z } from 'zod';

// ArkType mode (default) - requires ArkType to be installed
const env1 = arkenv({
  PORT: "number.port",
  HOST: "string.host",
});

// Standard mode - works without ArkType
const env2 = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: z.coerce.number().int().min(0).max(65535),
    DATABASE_URL: z.string().url(),
  },
  { validator: "standard" }
);
```

### Coercion

Control automatic type conversion (only available in ArkType mode):

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

// Coercion enabled (default)
const env1 = arkenv({
  PORT: "number.port", // "3000" becomes 3000
});

// Coercion disabled
const env2 = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: "number.port",
  },
  { coerce: false } // Must be a number string, not parsed
);
```

### Custom environment source

Provide a custom environment object:

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

const env = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: "number.port",
  },
  {
    env: {
      PORT: "3000",
      // ... other variables
    },
  }
);
```

### Array format

Control how arrays are parsed (only available in ArkType mode):

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

// Comma-separated (default)
const env1 = arkenv(
  {
    TAGS: "string[]",
  },
  {
    env: { TAGS: "web, app, api" },
    arrayFormat: "comma",
  }
);

// JSON format
const env2 = arkenv(
  {
    TAGS: "string[]",
  },
  {
    env: { TAGS: '["web", "app"]' },
    arrayFormat: "json",
  }
);
```

For more details on configuration options, see the [coercion documentation](/docs/arkenv/coercion) and [Standard Schema integration guide](/docs/arkenv/integrations/standard-schema).

## Common patterns

### Configuration factory

Create a configuration factory to handle different environments:

```typescript title="src/config/index.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

const createConfig = () => {
  const env = arkenv({
    NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'test' | 'production'",
    DATABASE_HOST: "string.host",
    DATABASE_PORT: "number.port",
  });

  return {
    isProduction: env.NODE_ENV === 'production',
    database: {
      host: env.DATABASE_HOST,
      port: env.DATABASE_PORT,
    }
  };
};

export const config = createConfig();
```

### Feature flags

Use environment variables for feature flags:

```typescript title="src/config/features.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

export const env = arkenv({
  "ENABLE_BETA_FEATURES": 'boolean = false',
  "MAINTENANCE_MODE": 'boolean = false',
  "ALLOWED_ORIGINS": 'string[]'
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common issues

1. **Missing variables**
   - Check if `.env` file exists
   - Verify variable names match exactly
   - Ensure variables are loaded before use

2. **Type errors**
   - Verify variable types match schema
   - Check for typos in variable names
   - Ensure all required variables are provided

3. **Loading order**
   - Load environment variables before importing config
   - Consider using a bootstrap file
   - Check framework-specific loading behavior

Commit message:

feat: introduce and document validator mode, clarifying coercion and supporting ArkType, Zod, and Valibot schemas.

apps/www/content/docs/arkenv/how-to/load-environment-variables.mdx, after:

---
title: How to load environment variables
description: Learn environment variables management in different environments and deployment scenarios.
---

## Local development

### Using `.env` files

The most common way to manage environment variables during development is using `.env` files:

```dotenv title=".env"
DATABASE_HOST=localhost
DATABASE_PORT=5432
NODE_ENV=development
API_KEY=your-secret-key
LOG_LEVEL=debug
```

### Best practices for `.env` files

1. **Document required variables**
   Create a `.env.example` file to document required variables:
   ```dotenv title=".env.example"
   DATABASE_HOST=localhost
   DATABASE_PORT=5432
   NODE_ENV=development
   API_KEY=your-secret-key-here
   LOG_LEVEL=info
   ```

2. **Gitignore configuration**
   Add these patterns to your `.gitignore`:
   ```dotenv title=".gitignore"
   .env
   .env.*
   !.env.example
   ```

3. **Environment-specific files**
   Use different files for different environments:
   - `.env.development` - Development settings
   - `.env.test` - Test environment settings
   - `.env.production` - Production defaults (if needed)

## Loading environment variables

### Using dotenv

The simplest way to load environment variables is using the `dotenv` package:

```typescript title="src/index.ts"
import 'dotenv/config';
// or
import * as dotenv from 'dotenv';
dotenv.config();
```

### Framework-specific solutions

Many frameworks have built-in support for environment variables:

#### Next.js
- Automatically loads `.env*` files
- Supports environment-specific files (`.env.development`, `.env.production`)
- [Next.js Environment Variables Documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/environment-variables)

#### Vite
- Automatically loads `.env` files
- Supports mode-specific files (`.env.development`, `.env.production`)
- [Vite Env Variables Documentation](https://vitejs.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html)

#### Express
```typescript title="src/app.ts"
import express from 'express';
import dotenv from 'dotenv';

dotenv.config();
const app = express();
```

#### Nest.js
```typescript title="src/app.module.ts"
import { ConfigModule } from '@nestjs/config';

@Module({
  imports: [
    ConfigModule.forRoot({
      isGlobal: true,
    }),
  ],
})
```

### Runtime arguments

You can also supply variables when running your application:

```bash
DATABASE_HOST=localhost DATABASE_PORT=5432 npm start
```

## Production deployment

### Cloud platforms

#### AWS
- Use AWS Systems Manager Parameter Store for non-sensitive values
- Use AWS Secrets Manager for sensitive values
- Set environment variables in ECS Task Definitions or Lambda configurations

#### Google Cloud Platform
- Use Cloud Secret Manager for sensitive values
- Set environment variables in Cloud Run or App Engine configurations

#### Azure
- Use Azure Key Vault for sensitive values
- Configure App Settings in Azure App Service

### Container environments

#### Docker

```dockerfile title="Dockerfile"
ENV NODE_ENV=production
```

```yaml title="docker-compose.yml"
services:
  app:
    environment:
      - NODE_ENV=production
      - DATABASE_HOST=db
```

#### Kubernetes
```yaml title="deployment.yaml"
spec:
  containers:
    - name: app
      env:
        - name: NODE_ENV
          value: "production"
        - name: DATABASE_HOST
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              name: app-config
              key: database-host
```

### Traditional hosting

- Set environment variables through the hosting platform's dashboard
- Use deployment scripts to configure environment variables
- Consider using configuration management tools

## Security best practices

1. **Never commit sensitive values**
   - Keep `.env` files out of version control
   - Use secrets management services in production

2. **Use different values per environment**
   - Don't share sensitive credentials between environments
   - Use environment-specific configurations

3. **Access control**
   - Limit access to production environment variables
   - Use role-based access control for secrets management

4. **Encryption**
   - Encrypt sensitive values at rest
   - Use secure channels for transmitting secrets

## Validation and typesafety

ArkEnv helps ensure your environment variables are valid:

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

export const env = arkenv({
  // Required variables with validation
  DATABASE_HOST: "string.host",
  DATABASE_PORT: "number.port",
  
  // Boolean values (accepts "true"/"false" strings, converts to boolean)
  DEBUG: "boolean",
  
  // Optional variables with defaults
  LOG_LEVEL: "'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error' = 'info'",
  
  // Optional variables
  "FEATURE_FLAGS?": 'string[]'
});
```

## Configuration options

ArkEnv supports several configuration options to customize its behavior:

### Validator mode

Choose between ArkType (default) or Standard Schema validators:

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';
import { z } from 'zod';

// ArkType mode (default) - requires ArkType to be installed
const env1 = arkenv({
  PORT: "number.port",
  HOST: "string.host",
});

// Standard mode - works without ArkType
const env2 = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: z.coerce.number().int().min(0).max(65535),
    DATABASE_URL: z.string().url(),
  },
  { validator: "standard" }
);
```

### Coercion

Control automatic type conversion (only available in ArkType mode):

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

// Coercion enabled (default)
const env1 = arkenv({
  PORT: "number.port", // "3000" becomes 3000
});

// Coercion disabled
const env2 = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: "number.port",
  },
  { coerce: false } // Must be a number; strings (like those from process.env) will fail
);
```

> [!NOTE]
> Since `process.env` values are always strings, using `coerce: false` with numeric or boolean schemas will cause validation to fail unless you provide a custom `env` source containing the expected literal types.
```

### Custom environment source

Provide a custom environment object:

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

const env = arkenv(
  {
    PORT: "number.port",
  },
  {
    env: {
      PORT: "3000",
      // ... other variables
    },
  }
);
```

### Array format

Control how arrays are parsed (only available in ArkType mode):

```typescript title="src/config/env.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

// Comma-separated (default)
const env1 = arkenv(
  {
    TAGS: "string[]",
  },
  {
    env: { TAGS: "web, app, api" },
    arrayFormat: "comma",
  }
);

// JSON format
const env2 = arkenv(
  {
    TAGS: "string[]",
  },
  {
    env: { TAGS: '["web", "app"]' },
    arrayFormat: "json",
  }
);
```

For more details on configuration options, see the [coercion documentation](/docs/arkenv/coercion) and [Standard Schema integration guide](/docs/arkenv/integrations/standard-schema).

## Common patterns

### Configuration factory

Create a configuration factory to handle different environments:

```typescript title="src/config/index.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

const createConfig = () => {
  const env = arkenv({
    NODE_ENV: "'development' | 'test' | 'production'",
    DATABASE_HOST: "string.host",
    DATABASE_PORT: "number.port",
  });

  return {
    isProduction: env.NODE_ENV === 'production',
    database: {
      host: env.DATABASE_HOST,
      port: env.DATABASE_PORT,
    }
  };
};

export const config = createConfig();
```

### Feature flags

Use environment variables for feature flags:

```typescript title="src/config/features.ts" twoslash
import arkenv from 'arkenv';

export const env = arkenv({
  "ENABLE_BETA_FEATURES": 'boolean = false',
  "MAINTENANCE_MODE": 'boolean = false',
  "ALLOWED_ORIGINS": 'string[]'
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common issues

1. **Missing variables**
   - Check if `.env` file exists
   - Verify variable names match exactly
   - Ensure variables are loaded before use

2. **Type errors**
   - Verify variable types match schema
   - Check for typos in variable names
   - Ensure all required variables are provided

3. **Loading order**
   - Load environment variables before importing config
   - Consider using a bootstrap file
   - Check framework-specific loading behavior
