openspec/specs/validator-mode/spec.md, before:

# validator-mode Specification

## Purpose
TBD - created by archiving change add-explicit-validator-mode. Update Purpose after archive.
## Requirements
### Requirement: Explicit Validator Mode
ArkEnv MUST support an explicit `validator` configuration option to choose between ArkType and Standard Schema validators.

#### Scenario: Default mode is ArkType
- **WHEN** `createEnv` is called without a `validator` option
- **THEN** it SHOULD use ArkType for validation
- **AND** it SHOULD support ArkType-specific features like string DSL and `type()`

#### Scenario: Standard mode validates without ArkType
- **WHEN** `createEnv` is called with `validator: "standard"`
- **THEN** it MUST NOT attempt to load or use ArkType
- **AND** it MUST successfully validate using Standard Schema validators
- **AND** it MUST work even if ArkType is not installed

#### Scenario: Missing ArkType throws error
- **WHEN** `createEnv` is called with `validator: "arktype"` (or default)
- **AND** ArkType is not installed
- **THEN** it MUST throw a clear, actionable error message explaining that ArkType is required for this mode

### Requirement: Standard Mode Restrictions
In `standard` mode, ArkEnv MUST only accept object mappings of Standard Schema validators.

#### Scenario: Rejecting ArkType strings in standard mode
- **WHEN** `createEnv` is called with `validator: "standard"`
- **AND** the schema contains a string (ArkType DSL)
- **THEN** it MUST fail with a clear error indicating that ArkType DSL strings are not supported in standard mode

#### Scenario: Reject non-standard validators in standard mode
- **WHEN** `validator: "standard"`
- **AND** a schema value does not expose `~standard`
- **THEN** it MUST fail with an error indicating an invalid Standard Schema validator

Commit message:

docs(validator-mode): update validator-mode purpose

openspec/specs/validator-mode/spec.md, after:

# validator-mode Specification

## Purpose
The validator-mode allows ArkEnv to operate in two distinct modes: `arktype` (default) and `standard`. Providing an explicit validator mode allows ArkEnv to be used without ArkType at runtime, reducing bundle size and removing the requirement for ArkType when it is not needed, while still providing full type safety via the Standard Schema specification.

## Requirements
### Requirement: Explicit Validator Mode
ArkEnv MUST support an explicit `validator` configuration option to choose between ArkType and Standard Schema validators.

#### Scenario: Default mode is ArkType
- **WHEN** `createEnv` is called without a `validator` option
- **THEN** it SHOULD use ArkType for validation
- **AND** it SHOULD support ArkType-specific features like string DSL and `type()`

#### Scenario: Standard mode validates without ArkType
- **WHEN** `createEnv` is called with `validator: "standard"`
- **THEN** it MUST NOT attempt to load or use ArkType
- **AND** it MUST successfully validate using Standard Schema validators
- **AND** it MUST work even if ArkType is not installed

#### Scenario: Missing ArkType throws error
- **WHEN** `createEnv` is called with `validator: "arktype"` (or default)
- **AND** ArkType is not installed
- **THEN** it MUST throw a clear, actionable error message explaining that ArkType is required for this mode

### Requirement: Standard Mode Restrictions
In `standard` mode, ArkEnv MUST only accept object mappings of Standard Schema validators.

#### Scenario: Rejecting ArkType strings in standard mode
- **WHEN** `createEnv` is called with `validator: "standard"`
- **AND** the schema contains a string (ArkType DSL)
- **THEN** it MUST fail with a clear error indicating that ArkType DSL strings are not supported in standard mode

#### Scenario: Reject non-standard validators in standard mode
- **WHEN** `validator: "standard"`
- **AND** a schema value does not expose `~standard`
- **THEN** it MUST fail with an error indicating an invalid Standard Schema validator
